Well, hello everyone and welcome back to
the embedded online conference. Uh we
have another great workshop coming up
for you here. Uh introduction to
hardware insecurity with a chip whisper
nano. Uh Nathan Jones is going to be our
instructor for this workshop. Um I uh
how's it going Nathan? Uh, it's great,
Jacob. It's been a really awesome
conference so far. I've learned a ton.
>> Awesome. Thank you. And, uh, I I was
going to comment to everybody, I've had
the opportunity to take this workshop,
um, actually last October when we ran an
embed system summit, uh, Stephan and I,
uh, in the San Jose area, and it's a
fantastic workshop. So, um, you know, I
highly encourage you, you know, pay
attention. Nathan is, uh, super
brilliant to this. It's, uh, fantastic,
super, super interesting. So, with that
note, uh, I'll hand things over to you,
Nathan. And uh uh Steph and I will be in
the background if anyone needs anything.
>> Awesome. Thanks so much, Jacob. Um yeah,
and you know, we already have more than
three participants, so it's already
exceeding my wildest expectations. Um I
appreciate everyone being here. I'm
super excited to be bringing this um
conference or this workshop to y'all. Uh
let me see. Um oh, here's the share
button. Um let me start sharing my
screen
and
okay so hopefully you can see a big PDF.
Um yeah today we're talking about
hardware hardware security but from the
from the insecurity side. We'll be using
the Chip Whisperer Nano if you have that
piece of hardware or data that was
collected using the Chip Whisperer Nano.
So you don't need that to participate in
the workshop. and we'll be talking about
how to use that device to conduct a
couple of attacks on embedded systems so
we can better understand um you know
what's out there and how we might
protect our systems. So uh these are the
notes I'll be going over uh today. I'm
I'm a fan of doing things a little
differently so I don't have slides. I
just I made a big poster and um let's
see our objectives uh firstly are to
discuss uh the hardware attack sequence
which will help put into context where
the attacks we'll talk about today might
occur. they're not necessarily the first
tools that an attacker is going to reach
for. And then we'll get into the the
meat of the the workshop. We'll talk
about side channel attacks, what they
are, and we'll spend a good chunk of
time talking about how we can work
towards uh what's called a differential
power analysis attack. And that attack
can let us read out effectively the um
AES key on a device doing uh AES
encryption. And then fingers crossed if
I don't spend too long on this, there'll
be a little bit of time at the end for
me also to demonstrate a fault injection
attack and how to use that to get around
like a password check. Um, so I'm going
to briefly talk about who I am and um
how you can make sure you've got the
proper files and software for the
workshop. But while I'm doing that, if
you would um jump in the chat window,
share with the group something that
you've learned so far at the the
conference this year. Um, and then
hopefully that that means that you can
post any questions. uh for the rest of
the workshop. You don't feel awkward at
all about posting those and and asking
me if anything's confusing. Um so
uh I uh have been in the military for a
long time. Stefan and Jacob and I were
just talking about how I've been growing
this out and this out for about a year
because I finally left finished a
15-year career in the military last June
and now I get to run Mindstorms
Engineering LLC which is just my little
single person consultancy and I get to
do a lot of really neat educational uh
things like putting on this workshop for
the embedded online conference and uh
I'm also writing a lot for uh digit over
on maker.io. Um, you can see a couple
pictures of me there back when I was in
the military and uh with my family. Um,
I got my undergraduate degree from
Harvey Mud College and a masterers in
computer engineering from NC State
University and um and I've had a blast
the last couple of years getting the
opportunity to um speak at this
conference. So um you can see a couple
of my presentations uh from the last few
years there as well as some kind of
highlighted stuff I've uh done for
embedded related and maker.io
or um the supercon.
Um okay, so if uh let's see, I want to
make sure everyone has um as we're
getting started has downloaded the zip
file that is on the workshop page. So
I'm going to pull that up.
Um okay, so that is uh right here
underneath the uh session slides. Uh if
you pull up that zip file, you'll see
it's got um these are my personal files.
So the the zip file that's in there has
uh the notes as well as some sample data
that we'll work with today. So like I
said, even if you don't have the Chick
Whisper Nano, you can still follow along
with all the exercises. And very
importantly, down here at the bottom is
the worksheet that we'll be going
through uh that has some spots for you
to um follow along and fill in some
answers. If uh um you get two ways to
kind of open that. one is uh as a
markdown file. I'm using here a program
called Typora to take a look at that. Uh
you can also open it up as just an HTML.
Um and you'll get the same thing. The
only caveat I'll share is that uh I'd
recommend opening this in Firefox. That
way if you click these check boxes or
further down here you are messing around
some of these settings in Firefox. If
you save Firefox will save all that data
with the HTML file. But it's my
understanding that every other browser
doesn't necessarily consider that part
of the HTML, so it won't save it. So
that's a little gotcha.
Um, now for the workshop, uh, there'll
be three tracks, uh, to accommodate all
kinds of, um, whatever setup you got. So
I've got a little icon here that looks
like a lightning bolt, the zap icon,
which denotes an exercise that you can
follow along with if you have the Chip
Whisperer hardware. uh a little computer
icon that indicates exercises that you
can complete without the actual Chip
Whisperer device. You'll just uh want to
have the Chip Whisperer software
installed so that you can sort of import
and manipulate the data that we'll be
working with. But there's also a third
track here uh denoted by this pen and
paper or pencil and paper icon. And uh
what that means is that you don't really
need any sort of special hardware or
software to do those exercises. um
they're they're not quite offline
because it is very helpful I mean to
have the software to look at some of the
graphs or to use Excel to kind of do
some number crunching but you don't need
to install anything special to follow
along with those exercises. Um so what I
want to do next is start talking about
that attack sequence and while I'm doing
that I would encourage you all to uh
pull up the worksheet and um take a look
at exercise zero. So there's some
instructions here uh if you have the
hardware or you want to install the
software to kind of manipulate our data
uh to how to there's some instructions
here for doing that and um that will um
that's probably a good thing to kind of
get started on while I'm while I'm
introducing the topic.
Okay, so uh so let's talk about this
attack sequence. So we're trying to
protect our devices from an individual
who might be wanting to make it do
something it wasn't supposed to do. Um
Sorry, one sec while I switch back to my
window. Okay. Um,
but uh the attacker is first not going
to reach for like the craziest thing
they can think of. Honestly, the very
first thing they're going to do is try
to conduct some reconnaissance. They're
going to take a look at um the not just
the product manuals that might come with
the device, but they'll also scour the
internet for repair tutorials or to see
if they can find the source code online.
They might look for patent filings or
FCC filings. um that are going to um
describe specifics to how the device was
was uh created uh or designed. And far
from just allowing the attacker to
understand the system a little better,
these can be pieces of information that
end up critically enabling of a future
exploitation.
After that initial reconnaissance, the
attacker might go uh open up the the
case, open up the device, and start just
poking around the circuit board to see
what they can find. They're going to
identify any parts that are on there.
They might pull up data sheets for um
microcontrollers or other integrated
circuits and they might start uh asking
you know what certain unlabelled pin
headers are available. Uh maybe they
find uh a J a JTAG pin header on there
that it's not exposed to the user or a
UART shell that's supposed to be just
for maintenance. Um and at this point
they might sort of be cataloging what
those are, you know, that they're there.
Um but they're asking them questions
like are these interfaces potentially
subject to certain attacks like fault
injections or timing attacks.
Um at that point the attacker might
start doing some very basic PCB
modifications. Um the fact that they
have are holding the device in their
hands means that uh they can affect the
circuit however they want. They can cut
traces. They can change the power
supply. Um, so you got a little diagram
up here of a an MCU connected to, for
instance, a temperature sensor, an
attacker might be able to trigger a
vulnerability. Uh, if the they make that
that microcontroller think the
temperature sensor is doing something it
never should have done by tying that
input line to VCC or to ground or
rapidly oscillating it. Um, those might
end up inducing, you know, um, errors in
the code that, um, that affect the, uh,
the actual firmware. if there's an
external memory chip um then you know
maybe we can can sort of listen in on
those lines or even cut them and inject
our own sort of memory contents into the
microcontroller um and uh and and this
is by this way sort of attack the
device. Uh this is actually how the
PlayStation 3 was uh attacked in 2010.
someone realized that uh there was an
piece of external memory it was talking
to and if they glitched one of the
memory lines at just the right time,
they could thwart a free operation that
eventually resulted in a memory leak and
gave attackers control of the device. Um
there might also be uh configuration
resistors or strap resistors that
control where the device boots from or
what sort of hardware revision that
microcontroller thinks it's attached to.
And so soldering or desoldering those
can affect the way that the
microcontroller runs to potentially give
an attacker a window into the device.
Um and then that brings us to what I've
got here is level four is side channel
attack. So at this point the attacker
has gleaned a ton of information if not
successfully thwarted um devices that
weren't as secure. Um, in a level four
side channel attack, the attacker is
going to try to get um information off
the device uh in ways that the designers
maybe hadn't anticipated. So, uh devices
leak information uh about what they're
doing and how they're um operating um
all the time in a way that you know
engineers we can't control because it's
just physics, right? A device puts off
heat when it does computation. The more
heat it gives off mean is is correlated
to doing more computation. um that's
just a side effect of of how the device
is operating. So in that sense, that's
the side channel that potentially an
attacker can use to kind of get an
indicator of what's going on and for a
successful attack. One of my favorites
down here are error messages,
specifically the nature and verbiage of
those error messages. So believe it or
not, many of us have actually conducted
a successful side channel attack. You
may have had the experience of going to
a website and having forgotten your
login and thought, "Ah, well, let me
just try this username and password."
And if you hit enter and the website
said, "Sorry, that's the incorrect
password for this username." You went,
"Aha, at least I got my username
correct." And that was a side channel
attack, right? Because the verbiage of
the error message that the website gave
you indicated you had the correct
username. Uh, devices also leak
information uh in their execution time,
how long they take to do certain
operations. So, I got a little example
here of like a logic analyzer scope of
sending a six-digit password to a
device. Now normally uh you would think
well if you know if I'm even if I'm only
restricted to alpha numeric characters
I've got like what is that you know 62
to the sixth possibilities or something
for my password. Um however if the
firware does a very reasonable thing
which is check the password user user
provides bite for bite and jumps out
early when it sees the first incorrect
bite like mem copy or mem compare or
string compare would do. Um then that
gives the attacker some information
because the attacker if they send uh 62
different passwords where the first
digit all varies. 61 of them will all
come back with that uh access denied
message in the same amount of time. But
there'll be one of them that takes just
a little bit longer corresponding to the
microcontroller identifying that the
first bite was correct and moving on to
the second one. And so in this way we
can actually uh you know brute force a
password not by searching 62 to the 6
but 62* 6 to find that password. The one
we'll look at today in depth is power
consumption. Um so uh just like heat
right devices when they do more things
they consume more power. And we'll use
the chip whisper nano today to um to
exploit this information we can get off
the device while it's doing that. So I
want to talk briefly about the um Chip
Whisper Nano and uh and then we'll move
into the the next couple of exercises.
So the uh Chip Whisperer Nano like you
can see here um is a development board
that has two parts to it. What the
manufacturer calls the capture side and
the target side. The capture side has a
SAM 4S microcontroller that we can talk
to over USB to configure, you know, sort
of our attack apparatus and the target
side provides us a small STM32 uh
microcontroller that we can kind of load
some code onto and um try to attack. Um
the Nano is a kind of the low-end model,
so there's only a couple of connections
between those two devices. Um notably,
we got a UART connection between the
two, so we can kind of send and receive
data. And there's also a trigger line
that uh the capture section uses to sort
of start the attacks. And we'll put
there's some code that we'll put in the
target today that will you know send
that signal to the uh capture section to
you know right we're about to start a
critical operation. And then uh this
board uh allows us to do those two
attacks I talked about side channel
analysis and uh fault injection. So uh
the target section the STM32 is um
placed in series with a shunt resistor.
That shunt resistor is connected through
a u capacitor to an analog to digital
converter on the capture side. So we can
use this to do some power readings on
the device. And furthermore, uh we've
got essentially just a MOSFET that's in
parallel with the target that we can
close to conduct our glitches, which
we'll talk more about later.
Additionally, the uh manufacturers of
this device provide a chip whisper li P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Pythyon library um with a couple of APIs
here that you can see that lets us kind
of configure everything on that board to
set up and conduct and analyze our
attacks. So, you can see here some kind
of a real basic um couple of Python
lines that would show you how we might
use that library to conduct our attack.
After importing the library, we're going
to create scope and target options or
sorry, objects and um and then down here
we are going to generate a set of random
text uh and use the capture trace
function to send that data to the
target, wait for the trigger signal to
capture a whole bunch of ADC data and
then record that along with whatever
response the target gave back to us in
this thing called trace. So, we'll use
those traces today primarily to analyze
the the uh the power data.
Okay. Um if you got any questions at
this point, absolutely post them to the
chat. We're going to pause though to uh
to move into the exercises one, two, and
three. These exercises are going to make
sure that we just have the proper
software installed so we can actually
conduct our exercises today. So, uh, in
exercise zero, as long as you've
installed the correct software, in
exercise one, if you have the chip,
whisper, and nano, there are some
instructions here on how to make sure
you can program that device. Um, we're
going to program it with this these
couple lines here that are just going to
do a very simple multiplication by two
uh in a for loop. If you don't have the
Chick Whisper Nano, you can skip this
one. In exercise two, we're going to
capture our first power trace. Um
there's a helper function that I made to
kind of simplify some of this stuff. So
uh if you have imported um that that um
that helper file um that's in the uh the
zip file that I sent um there's a really
easy way to get those traces. Otherwise
you can follow along with these
instructions here to use the chip
whisperer library directly to get that
power trace. And then in exercise three
we're just going to plot that trace.
Again, there's a a couple of helper
functions that uh I've written, but of
course, you can use uh whatever plotting
function you find most comfortable to do
that. Okay, so um my my target is to
finish in 10 minutes or earlier. Um if
you got any questions, post them into
the chat. Otherwise, I'll shut up and um
and we'll see if we can get all the way
through exercise three just to make sure
that we've got the software set up
correctly.
All
right. Hopefully just a couple minutes
left. Uh if you're ready to move on, go
ahead and give me a thumbs up in Zoom.
And uh if you are not, see, is there a
thumbs down option? Yeah, looks like I
can. you can try to give me a thumbs
down. Um you well hopefully let's see
can you see on my screen? Yeah, I've got
the worksheet on one side on the left
I'm um showing
um how now that since I've installed the
software how I'm going to execute those
first couple of steps. So once I I've
activated my um
um sorry this is the virtual
environment. Uh then I'm importing a
couple libraries and uh
um connecting I'm using the helper file
to connect to my attached chip whisper
nano.
Um I'm not going to flash mine because
I've got something on there I want to
show us later. But then I can use the
helper file also to flash that. And uh
then in exercise two I
can
uh use get traces to capture one
iteration of that that target doing the
multiplication by two. And uh
and then in exercise three
I can
uh plot the result of that um using my
helper file. And what I'm looking for is
something that looks a little like this
um like you kind of saw in the notes
there.
All right. So I'll go back here. Seen a
couple thumbs down. Let me check the
chat window to see if there's any
technical issues we can work through.
Okay, good. So, yeah. So, some folks
identified that the uh I accidentally
left the CWP file in there. So, if
you're getting an error about a file
already existing, just go ahead and
delete that and then import the stuff.
All right. Um, I'm going to continue on.
If you're still trying to get the
software going, then please keep working
on that. Hopefully hopefully we can get
it up. But that's part of the reason why
I've got that pen and paper option. So,
if whatever reason you're like, "Ah,
screw it." Um there's there's still lots
to engage with in the uh the workshop.
Okay. So I'm going to go back to my
notes. Um I've got a picture of that
power trace here in my notes. And um now
uh like I mentioned before, I think all
of us if we're looking at a power trace,
we have kind of the understanding that
you know it can tell us that the
microcontroller is active versus asleep
or whatnot. Um but we can actually infer
uh quite a bit more from just looking at
the power trace. So uh this this power
trace of the device doing multiplication
by two in a loop. The the code basically
looks like this. Like you can see here
we're going to do that multiplication
and then the the STM32 is going to send
a reply back to the um uh the capture
section. And with a little bit of
analysis we uh and kind of knowing that
the the responses come back at 38400
baud um we could take a look at this
power trace and identify these two large
sections at the back end of that power
trace as the sections where the
microcontroller is sending us back uh
that you know the first or second bytes
of that message. So, if we zoom in on
the uh first portion here, and uh the
reason why I'm using uh the uh hollow
views library is because this just makes
it really easy to zoom and pan. So, I
can kind of pan around like this when
I've got the crosshair selected or if
I've got my little magnifying glass
selected, I can really easily highlight
a section of the graph and zoom in
there.
If I zoom into that first portion, what
I notice um is that the microcontroller
is doing a thing and there's a feature
in the power trace that appears
identically 20 times in a row. And it's
not a coincidence that we're doing our
loop 20 times. Um this this little
feature in the power trace is is our
capturing of the microcontroller as it's
doing um uh that uh that for loop each
one iteration of that for loop. And this
works out because microcontrollers are
incredibly deterministic. So, uh, this
microcontroller has more or less the
exact same number of transistors that
are on on any given clock cycle, uh, as
it's doing this this multiplication from
iteration to iteration. And the, um, if
we ran this, you know, got this trace
again and again and again and again, um,
minus any variations in like our power
supply, um, basically we're going to see
the same trace. We're going to see the
same feature. Um, and we can use this to
our advantage. Now, uh, looking at this
feature, I I don't necessarily know that
this is a multiply inside a for loop.
Um, so, um, I can't I don't necessarily
quite have that level of granularity,
but again, looking at the power trace, I
can identify that, hey, there's 20 of
the same thing going on at this, you
know, in this section in this region,
and I can match that up with my source
code to figure out that, okay, that's
got to be the, you know, the 20 loop
iterations that are that are up here. Um
this is known as simple power analysis.
So uh looking at a single power trace
you know what is the information that I
can sort of glean from my device. Um and
uh so next what we're going to do uh is
is play around with this simple power
analysis and you'll start to see how you
can differentiate these power traces um
and identify what the what the
microcontroller is doing at each point
in time. Before we pull up that
exercise, what I want to do is just
mention one more thing for the curious.
Um, we're not looking strictly speaking
at the, you know, the power data of the
microcontroller because that ADC is not
connected directly to the power pin.
It's connected through a capacitor. And
that's exactly because we're looking for
very small variations. So, it's a little
more accurate to say that what we're
looking at in our ADC data is the
dynamic power or the switching power of
this microcontroller. Every time a
transistor turns on or off on each clock
cycle, um that shows up on our graph as
a little spike or a dip. Um in
information science, this is known as
the Hamming distance. Um so this is the
uh the Hamming distance is a is a
representation of how many bits had to
be flipped either zero to a one or a one
to a zero to go from one number to the
next. So you can see in this this
example here, if I've got this 8 bit
number on one clock cycle and on the
next clock cycle it looks like this,
there were six bit transitions. So we'd
say these two numbers have a Hamming
distance of six. So it's it's only a
slight oversimplification to say that
you know what we're looking at in our
ADC data is very is the Hamming distance
of the entire microcontroller. Um a
related concept is the Hamming weight
which will come in uh uh be more
important a little later on. The Hamming
weight is just a measure of the bit
count of a number. Um and uh also it is
it's true that the hamming distance to
go from zero to a number is the same
mathematically as the hamming weight of
that number because you know if you've
got five bits in a number you had to
make five bit transitions. Um okay so
what I want us to do next is take a look
at exercise four. All right. In exercise
four um we're going to do some simple
power analysis and match up power traces
to code snippets. So in the worksheet
here you can see five different code
snippets. One uh where I captured a
power trace but there was nothing in
between my two trigger um uh trigger
function calls. There was it was just
empty. Uh and the second one we're doing
multiplication by two again but not
inside a forward loop. I've literally
copied and pasted this times equals 2 20
times in a row. In um number three I'm
doing division by three 20 times in a
row. In uh snippet 4, I'm doing I'm
calling it a table lookup. You can see
down here in the code, what I'm going to
do is for for every bite of input that
comes from the capture section and and
it sends 16 at a time, I'm going to do
the exclusive oring of that input bite
with the corresponding bite of some
array in my source code that I'm calling
key. And then whatever the value of that
XOR is, I'm going to use that as the
lookup into uh another 256 element
array. And then I'm going to send back
from the target whatever value comes out
of that array lookup. Um, and then the
last good snippet I'm calling multiplier
divide. In this case, I've got a 16 bit
key. And for uh each bite of input, I'm
going to look up the corresponding bit
in my 16 bit key. And if the
corresponding bit in my key is a one,
I'm going to take my input value and
multiply it by two. If uh that bit in
the key is a zero, I'm going to take
that input bite and divide it by three.
And so these are all represented in the
um folder that you should have
downloaded as let me pull it up.
Uh it'll be the top five HTML files. So
ex4
trace zero through trace 4. All right.
These five traces correspond to these
five code snippets. And your task in
exercise four is to try to match them
up. Okay. So I'm going to give you a
couple hints before we do that. number
one um recall that okay there's that
that repeating section at the end the
really kind of big long one that
effectively represents how um the
microcontroller is sending back data
from the target. So what you're going to
do once you pull up the traces is try to
kind of zoom in on the front portion see
which is where the microcontroller is
actually doing those operations. Um,
next,
uh, the the the best way to kind of
differentiate these things is to see if
you can identify a repeating feature in
that first set, that first portion of
the power trace, and then count those
up. Because if you can count a repeating
feature that appears to show up 20
times, well, that's an indicator that it
might be one of code snippets two or
three, the multiplication by two or the
division by three. But if you're looking
at the code and you see or the power
trace and you see a repeating feature
that only shows up 16 times, then that's
an indicator we're looking at one of our
last two code snippets. All right. Um,
lastly, a couple notes about the micro
architecture of the uh target, the
STM32F0.
Uh, it does have a hardware multiplier,
but it does not have a hardware divider.
U multiplications and divisions by two
are probably implemented with a simple
left or right shift. And anytime the the
CPU encounters a conditional branch,
those can tend to be very power hungry
because if there's a a misprediction,
then we have to sort of dump the the
pipeline and restart to get to the
correct uh branch target. So those might
show up in the power trace as um as uh
larger larger power swings. Um okay,
so I'm going to pause now. Um our goal
in the next uh 10-15 minutes is to get
through exercise four where we are
matching up those HTML plots with the
five code snippets there. Um and uh I'll
be giving you a couple hints throughout
points if you are getting stuck. Uh
again, please post any questions to the
chat. Um let's get started.
All right, for for odds, um he's asking
about where do I put the um the command
for multiloop equals helper.get traces.
Um, so after I've installed the Chip
Whisperer software, um, I'm going to
activate that virtual environment, which
I think should be activated as part of
the installation, then I'm going to
navigate to where my uh, the zip file is
because I it's just easier to access the
helper file that way. And I'm going to
start that Python session. Um, after
I've imported some stuff, um, and in
this case, I'm connecting to the actual
target, but again, if you're just
working with the software data, you'll
just need,
um, where is it? Um, oh, right here. Uh,
you'll just need this little snippet to
like import the project data.
Um, so if I'm using the actual hardware
once I've connected, I'm going to down
here, you can see in my Python code, I'm
using the helper to flash it. That's
then what comes next is the
helper.getraces to capture the actual
data as my marking controller is doing
the the multiplication and then I'm
going to plot it. Um, but this is
specific to the chip whisperer and nano.
If uh if I'm using the um
the uh the sample data, then I'm just
going to use uh I'm going to import the
project and I can get the multiloop um
directly from accessing the
project.traces array and then I can use
that to do my plotting.
We're about six minutes into this
exercise. If we're still working, I'm
going to give us all a little hint. And
that hint is this right here. I've got
trace zero. So, this is trace zero in
the um I'll just minimize the other
ones. Trace zero. And
let me pull see if I can pull up trace
three. Where'd that go?
Oh, I'm not gonna find it this way, but
I'm gonna try.
Okay, there it is.
Um, so trace zero and trace three are
either code snippets five or six. All
right. So, if I see if I can
um I'm going to zoom in
to both of them.
All right. So, I've got trace um what is
this? Trace zero up top and trace three
on bottom. This is a zoom in of that
first portion of the graph. Um, if I'm
counting these the the repeated feature
in both features in both of these, uh,
there are 16 of them.
Um, so now I just got to figure out
which one is doing 16 table lookups and
which one is doing 16 operations of
either multiplication or division.
All
right, we're about 11 minutes in. One
more hint that I'm going to help you out
with. Trace two, one that's on my screen
right now, corresponds with my empty
code snippet. So, trace two corresponds
to code snippet one. So that means um
the only other two code snips we haven't
talked about yet code snippets two and
three the multiplication by two and
division by three are going to be either
traces one or four.
Um,
we might still be working on this, but
I'll also point out in the worksheet
that uh if you have assigned your
guesses to these and you are are waiting
for us to move on, there's a little uh
drop-own box here underneath the
responses where I've got a couple
extension questions that you can kind of
challenge yourself with um while you're
waiting to see if you, you know, can
deepen your understanding.
All right, we're going to keep moving
on. Um, someone helped me out. We knew
uh code snippet one corresponded to
trace two. That was the last hint I
give. Help me figure out what about the
other two sets, right? Which what what
are the what traces correspond to those
code snippets and I'll check our answers
here in a second. Um if at this point
you're still very unsure, post a
question in the chat and I'll try to
help clarify how how to look at these
graphs. But what I want to move on to is
um uh the the power of simple power
analysis. Okay. So at this point uh I
want you to sort of let sink in right
that um with the help a little bit of
the source code you were able to look at
a a power trace and kind of match up
sections of the power trace to specific
operations in the microcontroller and uh
this actually can be a huge leak in the
device. So what I'm looking at I'm going
to zoom in right here. This is the power
trace for the multiplier divide code um
code snippet. And one of the ways we
were able to we would have been able to
identify that is although there wasn't a
single repeating feature, there were two
repeating features. One which was
significantly longer than the other. So
uh thinking through what code that this
could be uh kind of narrows me down to
that last one where I'm doing, you know,
16 operations, but they're different
operations on each cycle. Furthermore, I
know that the operation either multiply
or divide. So it's probably the division
that's taking longer than the
multiplication. And so I can look at
this power trace now and go okay well
the the long repeating feature that's
the division very likely which
corresponds to the zero in my bit in my
key bit and the shorter repeating
sections correspond to the
multiplication or the ones in my key bit
and so uh literally looking at just the
power trace I can read off the bits of
my 16 bit like supposedly secret key and
in fact and that's not just a toy
example right in fact that's exactly how
you can use simple power analysis to
break RSA encryption on uh each
iteration of the loop that does RSA
encryption. The algorithm does either a
square or a square multiply uh based on
the bit value of the really long RSA
key. And you can see in this picture
here taken from a uh a academic paper on
the topic just like we just did. uh you
can look at that power trace and from a
single power trace kind of group these
features by long and short and
effectively read off the bits of the RSA
key directly from power data. Um so this
is um
>> uh so sorry I thought I heard someone
talking. So um so this is a really
powerful attack in certain cases. We're
going to use this data though. We're
going to build on it to uh to attack AES
encryption using uh a differential power
analysis. Now uh at this point if I
let's let's assume my microcontroller is
running a table the table lookup code.
Okay. Um let's say I send it two arrays
of data. In one the first uh bite is a
hex 1a followed by a whole bunch of
zeros and the second hex 1b followed by
a whole bunch of zeros. If I were to
collect those power traces they're going
to look really similar. In fact, I mean
I told you as much, right? That the
microcontroller was very deterministic.
So if I handed you these two power
traces and said which one corresponds to
which set of data, you'd very rightly
probably say I don't have any freaking
idea. They look identical. Um and that's
that's true. Um there is though a really
small difference between them which is
the actual data that they're operating
on. Um when I do a table lookup for hex
1A, the output is hex 63 which has a
handming weight of four. So there were
four transistors on in the register that
stored this value when my calculator did
that table lookup. And in the second
case for hex 1B, the output is hex 7c,
which has a heming weight of five. So
five transistors were on when that
register stored the the result of that
table lookup. And believe it or not, we
can actually see the difference from
that one transistor in the power trace.
But I need a little help to do that. I
need the help with statistics. So the
statistics statistics I'm going to do is
called difference of means. All right.
Um and uh the first step that I'm going
to do is I'm going to ask the
microcontroller to do not just sort of
one iteration on each set of data but
hundreds possibly thousands even tens of
thousands of power traces of it
operating on the two representative
pieces of data. And uh for each of those
two groups I'm going to average all the
traces together. As long as they're all
kind of aligned in time, then they all
represent the microcontroller in lock
step doing the exact same thing, you
know, thousands and thousands of times.
And so the average is going to help
lower the noise floor of my trace data.
Um, right? Averaging is effectively a
low pass filter. And so this is going to
help smooth out all the noise that might
be in my system from my voltage supply
or something that completely swamps the
effect of that that one transistor.
Uh, I'm going to do the same thing for
the second set of data. So another
couple hundred or a couple thousand
traces of my uh microcontroller
operating on hex 1B whatever and I'm
going to take the average of that. Okay.
So I'll have at this point two
representative traces of my
microcontroller operating on hex 1a
versus hex1b
and this is the same operation. It was
the same data except for that first
bite. So these two traces are more or
less identical except for the one spot
in the trace where my microcontroller is
computing the lookup and storing a
slightly different value in the output
register. So if I subtract these two
traces and I'll take the the absolute
value also because I don't necessarily
care if there's a peak or a trough just
that there's a deviation from one or the
other. Um I can sus out the effect of
that one transistor. So you can see here
um if I'm averaging 250 traces in each
group, I don't see a whole lot. If I
increase that number though to 500, I'm
starting to see, you know, the the the
rest of the peaks in the graph kind of
flatten out and I'm seeing that noise
kind of lessen and I'm starting to see a
little spike in the graph right here.
And at 750 traces, that peak is readily
apparent. So, it only took 750 traces
averaged out to lower the noise floor
enough in my trace data that I could see
the effect of that singular transistor
on my on my power trace. Um, the fact
that there's a peak here means that I
found a physical correlation to the way
that I've separated my data in how one
or the other has more transistors on to
affect that um that that power trace.
Um, okay. So, uh, so this this is big.
This is this is probably the biggest
hurdle to get to attacking AES. And what
I want us to do next is a couple
exercises to really kind of send this
home that we're able to kind of compare
these two sets of data and u, and see
differences in the power traces that
correspond to more transistors being on
or off in each set of data. Okay. So,
I'm going to go back to my worksheet
here. That's going to lead us into
exercise five. We're starting to talk
about differential power analysis. And
in exercise five, I want you to see for
yourself the effect of that one bit on
the on the power trace data. So in
exercise five, you're doing uh basically
the same thing that I just showed you.
Um we're just going to sort the traces a
little differently. So in uh in my
example that I just gave, I I sent the
microcontroller identical data a
thousand times in a row and then another
set of identical data a thousand times
in a row. and I sorted the values based
on the output. Um, the only difference
we're going to do in exercise five is
instead of sending it the exact same
data, we're going to send it uh a couple
thousand random pieces of data. So, the
uh get traces helper function every time
you call it is going to generate a
random 16 bytes of of data and send that
to the microcontroller to do the table
lookup. And uh if you are following
along with the software, then that's
exactly what I did in project traces one
through 25001. So those would be 2500
traces of a whole bunch of random data
going into the device and the the um the
power as it was doing the table lookup
uh in your um and and if you're doing
this pencil and paper style, here's a
there's a little spreadsheet here that
you can kind of follow along with that
has the data we want to look at.
Anyways, so you're going to make in your
Python ripple uh an array for the uh
table that we're looking looking into
that I call SBOX and the key array. Uh
and then what you're going to do what I
want you to do is to um we're going to
sort our power traces, but we're going
to try to find the effect of the last
bit of the output. So, uh in my notes,
uh you might imagine that I was sorting
these based on Hamming weight. Um we'll
we'll get to that in exercise six. In
this first exercise, I'm just going to
sort based on whether the la least
significant bit of the first bite to
come out of my my my microcontroller was
a one or a zero. And uh that code looks
like looks like this. Um once I have
imported the SBOX array and the key
array into Python, um I I can read what
text I sent in, what data I sent in, um
to my microcontroller and calculate what
the output of the table lookup would be
and whether the last bit least
significant bit was a one or zero. Um a
little shortcut I can do also is use the
fact that those traces all contain the
response text as well. So I can just
like jump right into what bite came out
of my microcontroller and what was the
the last bit of that value. I'm going to
take that and like I did in my exercise,
I'm going to sort those two those traces
into one of two groups based on whether
that last bit was a one or a zero. Then
I'm going to average those groups and
subtract them and plot the difference
and um I should see a little peak right
where um the uh for all the traces where
the least significant bit was a one as
compared to zero. Um so let's do that
now. I've got I think 10 minutes
templated or 15 minutes for um for this
exercise and you can roll right into
exercise six. You're doing the exact
same thing. you're just going to
differentiate the traces based on the
hamming weights instead of the value of
the least significant bit. But in both
cases, you should see a little peak
indicating that yeah, you found a a
separation of the data that corresponds
to more transistors being on in one set
versus the other set. So 50 minutes to
complete exercises five and six. Um
again, post your questions to the chat
so that I know, you know, we're we're
we're understanding we're getting it.
And um yeah, we'll see if we can find
those peaks.
Okay, Olson is getting stuck at exercise
three and plotting the the mold two
loop. That might just be a little error
in my my script there. So uh if
I think if you follow along with the
instructions,
multiloop should be a singular trace. Um
there were previous iterations of the
worksheet where the get traces function
returned a list. And so you can see
there in the very first line, we're
trying to right after the call to
h.curve, we're trying to call bolt to
loop bracket zero.wave wave to reference
the very first element. I think if you
followed along with the code so far, uh,
multiloop should just be a trace, not a
list. So you can get rid of the bracket
zero and just do multiloop.wave.
Try that and make let me know if it
works.
All
right, maybe about halfway through my a
lot of time, you can see up here on the
screen um me putting in my Python to
work on the sample data and then the
plot that that I got showing up for
exercise five. And uh yeah, pretty
clearly at least on mine, we got a
little peak here uh indicating that
we've correctly separated those two
traces and we're able to differentiate
between pieces of output that had a one
in the least significant bit position of
the first bite or values that had a
zero. So if you're still working on
exercise five, you can kind of look at
what I've got to maybe follow along and
make sure you're you're doing it
correctly. Otherwise, you can move on to
exercise six. And again, both of those
exercises at the bottom have little
dropdowns. If you have completed both of
them, uh you can look at those drop
downs for some extra little challenging
questions.
Um RF wants to know, uh how big of a
mismatch is there between the example
side channel attack we're doing today
and current state-of-the-art?
Um
and I would say it depends a little bit
on which target we're talking about. um
uh the the more secure ones that you
know we're we're protecting against this
type of side channel attack is part of
their threat analysis. So I'm thinking
of um you know smart cards and um
um what would be uh certain like secure
you know secure chips uh that are you
know hardware uh AES accelerators.
um it is significantly more challenging
but the the
um the process is essentially the same.
Uh there are a couple things that the um
have been kind of simplified for this
example that are little details that
would need to be accounted for in an
actual attack. Uh, one example is you
typically on a target remove all of the
capacitors
um from the device that you normally add
to kind of help smooth out the power
supply. You're going to take all those
off because you want to see every little
spike and dip in the power supply that
from the microcontroller as it's doing
its operation. Um, on the on this the
Chip Whisperer Nano, those have been
removed because we're intentionally
trying to target the device. but it's a
thing on a real device, you'd want to go
through and sort of prep, you know, prep
the PCB a little bit to try to get the
best um the best data off that device.
Uh and then there are other a few other
things that the manufacturers can do to
try to hide this leakage um that would
makes the attack um just a bit bit more
difficult to accomplish. Um but uh the I
think the you know hopefully the take-h
home right is that this this exact
process like I said just with a little
bit more complexity is exactly how you
you would conduct this attack on a real
device.
All right, I had templated, like I said,
15 minutes. Um, we're only at about 11,
but I want to make sure I've got I don't
I don't squeeze out the end of the
workshop. So, I'm going to keep going.
If you need time or if I'm moving too
fast, um, then post a little comment in
the chat. I'll slow down uh, and give us
some more time for these exercises. But
again you can see on my screen here uh
the code that I put in for exercise six
where we're using the hamming weight now
um instead of the just the value of the
least significant bit and then plotting
that. And one thing I want you to notice
here is that uh you know we still see
the peak. So this you know this attack
is repeatable. And furthermore when I
use the hamming weight that peak is
quite a bit taller uh than in the the
previous graph. So here I've got a value
of which is like 0.018
compared to
08. So it's a little more than twice as
big when I use the hamming weight. And
that's because u I'm using, you know, a
sorting of my data which is more in line
with the the fact that I'm looking at
power data, right? Um when I was sorting
in exercise five just on the least
significant bit. Well, there'd be some
outputs where the least significant bit
was a zero, but the rest were all ones,
right? And I'm going to see that on my
power trace as a higher value. And
correspondingly traces where the least
significant bit was a one and the rest
was all zeros. And so those in effect
kind of like muddy my data a little bit.
But when I'm sorting by Hamming weight,
I'm sorting literally by, you know, the
number of transistors that are on in
that output um uh bite. And um so that
corresponds much more strongly to the uh
um to the power trace. So I can see that
peak a little bit stronger. Um Nate said
he thinks he's getting something strange
for exercise six. I think that's
perfect. Okay. So remember that when we
trigger our ADC um well I didn't mention
this I guess but it's going to collect
5,000 samples just you know basically
until the buffer runs out and uh when we
were looking at you know in exercise
four those previous power traces there
are whole chunks of that that we didn't
necessarily care about that corresponded
to data being sent off the device. So in
this case, you've got that trace. You're
seeing these kind of little weird bumps
because there might be some some
operations the microcontroller is doing
towards the end like when that data is
coming off the device that have a
correlation to uh this the the way
you've sorted your data. Those are what
we might call ghost peaks. But remember
that uh the table lookup code, we wanted
to zoom in on that portion. It was
really the table lookup code only took
like it was like somewhere between two
and 400 uh like X counts to complete.
So, Nathan, if what you do is just sort
of zoom in on the first 400 or so, four
or 500 uh data points of your graph,
then uh I think you'll see what I've got
on my screen here and and then and I can
kind of see it actually on your graph
there like towards way towards the left
there's that really sharp peak. Um okay,
so again, I'm going to keep moving on,
but if you need more time, let me know.
Um the what I want to do next is uh
exercise seven. This is another kind of
short one, but I want to drive home the
fact that um it's the presence or
absence of this peak that sort of tells
us whether we have a sorting of our data
that corresponds to things in real life.
So, uh for exercises five and six, we
knew the value of the key. We were
referencing in the code key zero, which
was the actual value being used on the
microcontroller to do our sorting. So,
what I want you to do in exercise seven
is choose a wrong value. Right? But I
think in the code it's hex 1A is what
it's supposed to be. Pick any any bite
value other than hex 1A and rerun one of
those two exercises. Um, and what I
expect you to see is that the the data
once you sort on the wrong key value,
you're effectively you've effectively
sorted the two uh your traces into two
groups on random purely randomly. And
when you look at that difference
function, you won't see the strong peak
that we saw in our two graphs from
exercises five or six. So, tackle
exercise seven. I think I got just uh
five minutes templated for this because
this should be a quick one to just sort
of rerun and see like, yeah, I don't get
a peak if I'm not using the correct key.
Uh, and then we'll move on.
Okay, we're going to move on. You can
see in my window again, I've got my
little code at the bottom where I'm I I
sort of reran the last code using the
handmade. I just underscore bad without
all of them and I picked a a value 127,
right? So, what's that like um 7F or
something? I just, you know, and you can
see in the resulting graph on the bottom
here, um, I I guess I do kind of have a
peak where I roughly expected it, but it
is quite weak, much weaker compared to
the, you know, you know, the the other
grass where that peak was much much
taller. And furthermore, you know, I've
got a lot more I got a lot more noise in
here. That peak, you know, compared to
sort of the next highest peak is not
super strong. Whereas in these two
graphs uh you know especially the one
where I was looking at the hemiweight
the peak value you know the ratio of
that peak value to the next highest was
much much stronger. Um so I'm going to
go back to my notes now and uh and I
want that to right to kind of sink in.
Okay, so several times now we've seen
that uh with enough traces of the
microcontroller doing some operation. Um
I can find uh if I know what it's doing,
I can sort those traces based on the
value of a single transistor and see a
peak that indicates like yep that's a
that's a sorting that resulted in more
power draw from one set of traces versus
the other. And furthermore, if I um if I
have my key, you know, the assumption as
to what the key bit is or the sorry, the
key bite um wrong, then I don't see that
peak, right? That peak kind of tells me
more or less whether or not I've I've
I've got I've hit on something or I
haven't. And so this is exactly how
we're going to break AES. Okay, you can
see in the in the notes here, I've got a
flowchart that depicts exactly how AES
is run. And the first two steps of AES
are uh an exclusive oring of bite for
bite the plain text with the AES key.
And then the result of that XORing goes
into a substitution
uh where that value is looked you know
it's used as the index into an array and
some value pops out. And you can see
here the uh you know really common array
to do that table lookup. It's called the
Rend Doll I think I'm pronouncing that
right S box or substitution box. Okay.
So that's what we've been doing this
whole time. And maybe some of you knew
it from the get-go. I didn't really try
to mask it, but that table lookup we
were doing was in fact the very first
two steps of AES. And combined with what
we now know about using difference of
means to sort of see the effect of a
single transistor, we can use this now
to break our AES. So step one of this
process is to collect a few thousand
traces, maybe more of our device as it's
undergoing as it's conducting AES
encryption. So we're going to send in
like we just a whole bunch of random
data like we just did for exercise five
and we're going to get a whole bunch of
uh power traces of the device doing AES
encryption on that data. Uh in this
case, we don't have the output from the
device, we just have the power data.
Um
in step two,
we're going to try 256 values for key
zero. Um it's a bite. It has to have one
of 256 values. I don't know necessarily
what it is, but what I know is that I
can guess, you know, I can guess every
value and 255 of them. If I if I assume
it's to be the value and I sort my
traces based on what I think the output
of the substitution box was, um 255 of
them are going to give me a graph where
there's just like not a strong peak like
we just saw in exercise 7. Um, some of
them might give me some like sort of
strong peaks if there's like a little
bit of a correlation between an
incorrect key guess and the output data,
but the correct key guess will give me a
strong peak. And so, um, I don't
necessarily know that until the end. So,
basically what I'm going to do in step
two is 256 times make a a guess at the
key bite for key zero. um sort my
traces, average them, take the
difference, and I'm going to save
whatever value is at the peak value in
that uh in that graph. Um and I might
need to restrict myself to just the
region of interest like the 0 to 500
traces, but I'm going to store that. And
then once I have 256 peaks corresponding
to each value of a bite for key zero in
step three, I'm just going to look at
each of my highest peaks and find the
highest value because the highest peaks
among peaks is the likeliest guess for
key zero. Once I've done that, all I
need to do to get the rest of my AES key
is repeat steps two and three 15 more
times for each of the remaining bytes of
the key. Um, so this is known as a
differential power analysis attack on
AES. I want us to take just a couple
minutes to try to do uh steps two and
three just for key zero. Okay, so in
exercise eight, we're going to exercise
eight now. Um, you're going to load a
new set of data. Uh, if you've got the
chip whisperer now, you can program it
and actually conduct that encryption.
And otherwise, you're going to find uh
the you're going to grab the last 2500
traces out of the imported data. So,
projectraces
251 through 501. And again, if you're
using pencil and paper, here's a sample
table that you can use to do this uh
analysis with a hint here for our pen
and paper solvers to so that you don't
have to test 256 keys. And and then
you're just going to follow that
algorithm, right? For each of 256
possible guesses at key zero, you'll do
your difference of means and save the
peak and then figure out what the peak
value, the highest peak value is and
what the what the the value of key zero
was. that was associated with that peak
value. Okay, so I think I've templated
10 actually 10 minutes for this. Take 10
minutes um to uh follow the pseudo code
in exercise 8 to see if you can
determine the correct value of uh key
zero. Uh if you have extra time, there's
a couple of extension questions at the
end of exercise eight. And I'll also
encourage you to move on to exercise 9.
I'm probably going to skip that one so
we can go to fault injection and wrap
up. Um, exercise nine is just completing
the the full attack on AES. You're going
to sort of repeat exercise eight for
bytes one through uh 15 of the AES key.
Um, all right. So, good luck finding
that first bite of the key. Again, post
any questions to the chat. Otherwise, in
like 5 10 minutes, uh, I'll tell you
what the correct key bite value is, and
we'll move on to fault injection.
All right. So, um that's been it's like
a little over about 10 minutes, I think.
U you can see in my screen on the left
my Python code where I'm going through
this attack process. Um, it looks like,
at least on my data, the maximum value
in all those peaks happened to be
decimal 43, which is hex 2B.
And if we look at I mean, you can tell
by the sound of my voice that I'm not
surprised by that. But if we pull up the
code for the AES library that uh is
running on this device, the default key
starts X2B.
Okay.
So, let me go back to my notes here. All
right. Um,
if you've got any questions at this
point, please post. But hopefully
you got that same number or or
understand how you could. Uh, again,
that's the differential power analysis
attack on AES. And um although um it's
um like Nathan asked before, we're on
slightly idealized hardware, uh that
same attack, you know, it can be used on
on real devices uh to pull off the AES
key unless they're doing something to
close off those side channels, which is
crazy. Um
Omar asked, exercise one, do we need
special hardware? You don't. So, if you
have the Chip Whisperer Nano, you can
follow along with all the uh the
workshop tracks that are have the little
lightning bolt icon. Uh if you don't,
you can still install the Chip Whisperer
software and work with all the sample
data that we've got. You'll just follow
along with the the laptop icon. Uh or
you can do none of that and follow along
with the pencil and paper icons to work
on the um just the with with no software
installed, just on the data that's in
the worksheet.
Um okay. So,
uh, again, if you got any questions
about side channel stuff, post them
because I'm going to move on to fault
injection. Um, there's some fun stuff to
do here. But give me just one sec
because what I'm going to try to do is
set up uh a demonstration of fault
injection. Um, the uh it just takes a
it'll take me a little second, I think,
to get it going.
Okay, so I'm running some code here.
I'll talk about this in just a second.
What I want to do though is talk about
um what fault injection attacks are. So
we're moving up in our sequence now. And
the reason I put this at level five is
because fault injection attacks are in
reality they're a lot simpler and
simpler to understand. Um but it's it's
a whole lot like throwing darts at the
wall and hoping some stick and by the
nature of trying to induce a fault in
the microcontroller. Uh we we run the
risk of possibly damaging it. So that's
why I said it's a bit more invasive and
kind of further up what an attacker
might do. But a fault injection attack
sort of begins with this idea that every
electronic device has required operating
conditions. So you can see here a couple
of rows from the data sheet for our
target on the chip whisperer and nano
the STM32F-0
and there's a maximum clock frequency
that we can run the device at. And
there's a minimum and maximum voltage
that we're supposed to run the device
at. Um all of us know if we're too far
outside that range, bad stuff happens.
The device doesn't run. Um but an
attacker might ask, what if we're just a
little bit outside that range? What
would happen if I ran the device at 1.9
volts or I ran it at 50 megahertz?
Well, in reality, if we're just a little
bit outside the range, maybe not a whole
lot. Um, the device probably has a
little bit of a safety margin. Um, but
there might be a region somewhere in the
middle where it's like, I don't know,
we're not quite far enough outside the
range to, you know, truly reset the
device and do anything bad, but we're
far enough outside of normal that we
don't know what to expect. Um, and in
all reality, when we do a fault
injection attack, we we don't know what
to expect. But commonly what we might
see are instructions that get skipped.
So machine instructions that the
processor fetches that just are thrown
away because they're they're garbled or
something. We might get a might be able
to alter an instruction or alter the
value that's gets loaded into memory to
change it in some way. Not really
controllable by any sort of means, but
um we can still potentially leverage
this to get the device to do some pretty
nasty stuff. Uh now recall that for the
chip whisperer and nano our glitching
hardware is super basic. We've got
essentially a MOSFET in parallel with
our STM32
C0. And unfortunately the the control we
have over this thing is also very basic.
Um I essentially have two levers I can
pull to try to conduct my my little
glitch attack which are um how long do I
wait after a trigger event before I
close the MOSFET and how long do I keep
the MOSFET closed for? That's about it.
Um, those are examples of voltage
glitching attacks, but in more uh more
professional setups, I might be able to
switch from like the, you know, target
voltage, 3.3 volts or something to a
specific voltage. So, not necessarily
slamming it to ground, but something in
between. Um, I can also glitch the
clock. So I might send in a 48 megahertz
clock to run my device, but for a clock
cycle or two clock cycles, I might run
that kind of double speed to, you know,
to send in a couple extra clock pulses
to see what that happens. And in more
advanced setups, I can even do uh
electromagnetic fault injection or use a
laser if I've kind of stripped off if
I've decapped the device. Um these two
are kind of cool. So uh because they add
an XY dimensionality to the parameters I
get to play with. So I can potentially
kind of hover over, you know, the ALU to
target that or hover over the
instruction register in the processor to
kind of target that. Um, and
electromagnetic, that's literally just a
strong electromagnetic that's hovering
over my microcontroller that I sort of
discharge a magnetic pulse into to
conduct my glitch. Um, Oddson says, uh,
brown out. Yeah. So, um, if we're too
far outside the range, right, the
microcontroller's brownout detector
trips and puts the device into reset.
And one of the counter measures against
a voltage fault injection attack is to
try to set that brown out detector
really aggressively so that if we're,
you know, even a little bit outside the
proper range, uh, we just don't do
anything. We try to reset. Um, okay. So,
I'm going to show you kind of what this
looks like in our in our power traces.
So, I've got three power traces here of
the um uh STM32 uh was it C0 F-Zero um
doing that table lookup and I've got a
couple of different kind of pairs of
parameters. One where I've set the
offset at 771 and the repeat value at
five. And in this case, uh you can't
even really see it, but right about
sample 95 is where that glitch hits, but
it's not it's not big enough to do
anything to the microcontroller. you
know, internal and external capacitances
mean for that really short repeat value,
even though the voltage literally goes
to zero, the microcontroller just kind
of keeps on running like normal. Uh, if
I lengthen that repeat value to 15
though, that's enough to reset the
microcontroller. So, you can see here at
sample 95 where that glitch hits and we
just flatline, we go into full reset and
then the microcontroller starts back up
again.
But I found that at offset 780 and a
repeat value of 11 I got a really
interesting glitch. And you can see
again you can see that in the power
trace here where that kind of dips a
little bit but the microcontroller keeps
on going. And when I looked at my data I
found it fascinating that the uh value
the output value for the sixth bite was
wrong. Right? Like I sent in hex FF and
if I look up if I do the table lookup
the value that came out should have been
hex 33 but it wasn't. it was hex16. So
this is an example of how I can use this
voltage fault injection to to do
something on the microcontroller that
causes to causes it to behave
erroneously. Um like I said, it's kind
of like throwing darts at the wall, but
it turns out there's a whole lot of code
that's really susceptible to this sort
of thing and susceptible in a way where
I only necessarily I only might need to
get the microcontroller to glitch once
to get essentially access to the full
device. So I'm gonna show you how that
we might do that. Um here's some sample
code here. This is like a a function in
like maybe a little UART shell where um
the user can type, hey, give me the
secret thing. And uh this code says,
well, you know, we default to no access.
So if there's no access, then I don't
give it to you. I'm going to give you
the access denied message. Um and if
access variable is true, well, then I'll
give you the secret thing. And
presumably there's some other function
here where the UR can like I mean sorry,
the user can like type in their password
and like flip that boolean access
variable from false to true. But we're
not going to worry about that for right
now. So that uh that function when I
compile it turns into this set of
assembly code here. And you can kind of
see on the left I've tried to annotate a
a little bit. I've got some preamble
instructions to my function. Uh then
four instructions here where I'm pulling
the access variable out of memory and
testing it. If it's um if it's false,
then I take this um dark green branch
down here to the the else portion where
I spit out the access to hide message
and then complete my function. Uh but if
the access variable is true, I fall into
this kind of upper middle portion where
uh I do send out the secret thing and
then I follow this kind of dark teal
branch down to the end of the function.
And uh what's fascinating to me is that
all the instructions that are bolded are
instructions that are susceptible to
glitch attacks. meaning if I can get
them to corrupt or skip, then I could
potentially cause my microcontroller to
emit the secret thing without ever
having set the access variable to true.
And so I want to show you uh really
quick kind of how we might do that. Um
the simplest one might be this branch
instruction here, right? Because I'm if
if I don't have access, I'm supposed to
take that branch. But if I can force my
microcontroller to skip the branch
instruction, I fall straight into that
that upper middle portion where I get my
secret. Um down here these uh uh
instructions are really interesting
because uh at this point the code has
already decided I don't have access.
However, I found it very interesting
that my linker put the denied message at
an earlier address than my secret
message. Meaning if I could somehow
change how many characters are sent out,
even though the microcontroller thinks
it's printing the access to it message,
I can cause it to write off the end of
that array and into the secret thing.
Um, so there's several ways we can do
that. A couple of which I've annotated
here. Um, but that's those aren't the
only two places we can glitch our code.
At some point in the microcontroller
startup sequence, the access variable in
memory is cleared to zero. I could
potentially glitch that instruction in
the reset handler. Uh, and if I could do
that, then the microcontroller will
start with whatever garbage value is in,
you know, RAM as being the access
variable. And the way C works, if that's
any nonzero value, I'm going to start my
microcontroller with access to it. Uh,
additionally, like I said, there's a
separate function somewhere where, you
know, we can type in our password and
get access to this device. We haven't
even touched what that code looks like
and whether or not there are some some
glitch targets in there, uh, excuse me,
to um, to potentially, you know, call
into that function and then, you know,
force the code to to give me access. Um,
so what I've done in uh in my little
demo here, I want to show you my code.
Um, is uh I' I've I'm sort of praying,
right? Okay, so let me let me go back to
my notes. So um to conduct this these
glitch attacks, right? You can see a
little a little couple of steps here. Um
number one, I have to, you know, have an
idea of what I'm trying to target even
though I I can't necessarily, you know,
I don't have enough control to say I
want to hit this instruction or I want
this instruction to be skipped or or
garbled. Um, but I can have an idea of
kind of what I'm trying to do. Um, I
need to determine some sort of
triggering event that, you know, will
try to get me, you know, my glitch in
line with the thing I'm trying to hit.
So, in the sort of the worst case, I can
maybe count off of when the reset line
on the microcontroller goes high. Um, or
maybe if I'm sending this thing a
password, um, I can time it off of when
my stop bit to my me sending my password
goes high on the UART line and kind of
count off that before I I trigger my
glitch. And then essentially uh a whole
bunch of times I'm just gonna try to
trigger this glitch and I'm going to do
a parameter sweep off of everything I've
got. So in this case again with the chip
spray nano it's pretty minimal. I've
only got you know that offset and that
that repeat value but I'm just going to
kind of sweep all those parameters. I'm
going to try to glitch a whole bunch of
times and just pray I'm going to pray
that something works. Um, so in my code
here, you can see uh I've got a slight
range of repeat values that I have found
work that are just enough to cause some
damage, but not quite enough to
consistently reset the microcontroller.
And I've got a range of offset values
that correspond to that get secret
function and me kind of trying to hit
one of those areas to trigger a glitch
and and get the um the secret out from
my device. And then uh for every repeat
value that is in the range I listed for
every offset value that I've listed and
for each of those 50 times. So I'm going
to try to iterate 50 times at each you
know combination of reset and uh or
sorry repeat and offset. Um for each of
those I'm going to arm my scope. I'm
going to send my device the command to
hey give me the secret. And um that
automatically kind of triggers my my
microcontroller uh or sorry that the
target right when the when the um when
it sends the trigger at the start of get
secret. That's my that's my little cheat
um to make this you know demonstrable um
it's going to conduct the glitch. Now in
this code uh basically if there's if
there's no answer the microcontroller
probably wanted to reset. So we're going
to reboot and try again. For any
anything else I'm just going to print
out all of my unique responses
um just to see what's there. Okay, so
let's go back to my terminal and see
what's happening. Um, you can see here
we are about 11 minutes in, little more
maybe. And um I really haven't seen
much. I got my access denied message
like you know you'd expect for most of
them. Um, one of them here might have
been blank. So I did something to kind
of glitch it, but then it doesn't seem
like I got any actual data in my in my
response. Um, I'll keep letting this
thing run. Um, but again, it's like
throwing darts at the wall. When I This
does trigger uh pretty consistently.
However, let me pull it up. Uh, when I
uh in my testing, I had to wait as long
as like 18 minutes or so. Um, and so on
a previous run,
uh, let's zoom in here. Uh you can see
uh right about 18 minutes um here the
very last message gets sent out was
access denied followed by secret thing
and then a whole bunch of other stuff.
Right? So you know pretty clearly in
this example we we did exactly that
glitch that I was describing where it
seems like we we just sort of messed up
the microcontroller being able to
calculate the actual string length it
was trying to send out. And so it did
what it thought it needed to do. It gave
me the access denied message, but then a
whole bunch of other stuff including the
secret. And if this secret thing was
like the the actual password that I
needed to um to get, you know, to flip
that access variable. This is an example
of, you know, I don't need to
consistently do the glitch. I just
needed to, you know, get it once and
then I got the password and now I can
get legitimate access to the device from
here on out. So, uh,
these are, um,
you know, it's wild to me to think, uh,
about the fact that these work at all
and and what that means in terms of of
our security. Um, okay. So, I'm going to
I'm going to close out. That's that's
what I've got. And, uh, I want to leave
you with a couple of thoughts. All
right. Number one, the very last spot on
the worksheet that I'll encourage you to
fill out is what are three things that
you would like to remember from today's
workshop? um doesn't have to be you
don't have to summarize the entire thing
in in three bullet points, but what are
uh you know, three things that really
jumped out at you is being kind of cool
or kind of interesting.
Um I uh I want to remind everyone that
uh you don't necessarily need to be
completely terrified at this point.
Counter measures for these things
absolutely do exist and in many cases
these attacks are outside the scope of
what you necessarily need to be worried
for for the devices that um that you're
building. um they um they are there and
I ran you know unfortunately there's not
enough time to kind of talk about the
whole process but if you're curious
about what that looks like you know hit
me with some questions either here at
the end of the workshop or in the the
Q&A panel um if if any of this was cool
and you want to learn some more I I
learned a ton from following along with
uh Colin Flynn and Yaspberenberg's book
the hardware hacking handbook
actually is the CEO of new tech that
makes the chip whis whisperer. Um, so
you'll see a lot of parallels to the
what we did today in that book and
there's just a ton of great information
about how to conduct these attacks um in
real life. All kinds of different side
channel simple power analysis fault
injection attacks on on real devices.
And then uh the last thing I'll say is
um there's a uh you know Stefane and
Jacob I think really appreciate feedback
in terms of those little star ratings on
the videos. So um if there was a video
you know any video that you've or any
workshop or or presentation in the
conference so far that you really
enjoyed um you know please let them know
that that you found it valuable and
you'd like to see those speakers come
back. Uh I'm also going to you know
small ask for me is to take one extra
minute and follow that uh link there or
the QR code to a very short survey. Uh
it's like five or six questions where
you just uh I'm just going to ask to uh
you to tell me what I did really well,
what I can improve on to just help me as
a presenter make sure that I can I can
give really great trainings in the
future. Um if you've made it this far,
looks like there might be 20 of us or
so. Then from the bottom of my heart,
thank you for your your attention and
your patience. I I hope you got
something really great out of this
workshop and uh I'll stick around if we
got any questions.
>> Awesome. Thanks, Nathan. Very much.
Yeah, great workshop. We really
appreciate it. So, thank you.
>> Um, yeah, and thanks everybody for for
being interactive. I'll let uh Nathan uh
you can obviously stick around in case
there's any questions. I'll just let
everybody uh know here while uh they
might be posing any additional questions
at uh at about 4:30. So, in about uh 34
minutes here, uh we're going to have
another live panel. It's going to uh
discuss hardware, IoT, and connectivity.
So uh we hope you'll join us for that
and that'll be the last live workshop
for today anyways and then we'll resume
again to uh tomorrow morning. So uh with
that in mind um you know again thanks
all the attendees and and Nathan and
then we'll see if there's any additional
questions.
>> Yeah I see Jacob I see two in the chat
window that I didn't get a chance to
answer. So one's from RF. He says these
techniques I presume are applicable
across the board of MCU CPUs GPUs NPUs.
U the short answer is yes. Um the you
know sometimes the devil's in the
details. One significant thing that's
different between a microcontroller and
something like a hardware accelerator
are the fact that um we can't actually
rely on the Hamming weight anymore to
kind of differentiate our power traces.
Um we got away with it in this case
because uh essentially every
microcontroller for the you know
critical registers are going to put them
in a pre-charge state between each clock
cycle to make it you know to make them
either take that one or zero a lot
faster. So we you know I kind of hand
wave over but we were able to make that
approximation that the ADC data we're
looking at is Hamming distance but if
the registers are all pre-charged to
some intermediate value then they're all
more or less starting from zero every
clock cycle. So then the Hamming weight
that we can easily calculate uh is the
same without that assumption which would
be the case in a lot of like hardware
accelerators. Um in order to do my
attack I have to kind of track the
previous register value to be able to
associate that with a hamming distance.
Um so that's just a little way in which
you know the again the the basics
absolutely true across the board but
then the subtleties of the attack have
to account for the various kind of um
devices that we're we're trying to
target.
Um, and then Keith asked, um, what
should be our takeaway to make better
and more secure devices, or are we just
limited to what we can do given the
processors we use every day? Um, yeah, I
mean, I hope we don't, you don't walk
away from this being like a security
nihilist. I mean, I I I like the fact
that there's some really wow factors
here and like, holy I didn't,
pardon me, uh, you know, like that this
thing was capable. But to me, that's
absolutely the first step. on the
security panel this morning. Um there
were many wonderful experts that said,
you know, some of us are just not even
doing a threat analysis. And I would
say, you know, that threat analysis
isn't worth, you know, a dollar if you
don't actually know what the threats
are. Um so I'll reiterate that, you
know, these these attacks, they're not
easy to do in practice. And you know,
there's a reason why, you know, steps
one through three of the spectrum were
all easier stuff, right? you know, I'm
not gonna I'm not gonna try to do a side
channel attack if I can find an unlocked
debug port hidden on the PCB. Uh so I
feel like the takeaway is know that
these exist number one, right? But then
on every project realize that security
has to be a design criteria. Um and what
you want to do is just sort of analyze
who who might be wanting to get into my
device and what are their capabilities
and you know for the ones that I deem
feasible, how do I protect against
those? Maybe it's maybe I just need to
protect against that debug port access.
So I'm just going to make sure that all
my production devices lock the debug
port. Maybe in some cases like if I'm
designing a smart cart or a key fob, I
need to do a little more due diligence
to realize, you know, what folks can do
with side channel and fault injection
attacks and and employ more
sophisticated countermeasures.
Um asked how hard is this if you don't
have the source like we did or the
source code. Um
the
I mean I would say definitely it makes
certain things more more difficult but a
lot of times that's kind of step one
right as the attacker you know as
they're doing their snooping and their
PC modifications they're going to try to
find a way to um uh to recover the
source code. I mean and that can be um
you know maybe maybe my as a
manufacturer I didn't ship my overtheair
update in you know in encrypted fashion
and maybe it was only once but if that
one time I encrypt I sent out my
firmware update in plain text and it you
know someone stashed on the internet
okay now folks essentially at least for
that version of my software right have
have a copy of the source code um but it
might also be that you know if I'm uh if
I've got like my external memory maybe I
maybe I do ship my firmware update
encrypted. But if it installs into the
external memory in plain text and I just
attach a couple logic probe lines to
that memory interface. Okay, well now I
can read that off. So um there are there
are plenty of ways to kind of you know
that's not even getting into like one of
my I think it's most fascinating is like
social engineering right like you know
that's I think totally something that
engineer is going to try is call the
call the company and say ah yeah I just
I lost the source code or whatever can
you give it to me. So um it you know
having the source code is very
beneficial and it's the first thing an
attacker might try to do but there there
are several ways to to do that even if
it's you know the you know encrypted in
some fashion
All
right. Um, Jacob, I think that's
everything. Uh, I didn't have any
contact info, but I I'll put I'll put
that in the the Q&A. So, um, y'all can
reach out to me via email uh or LinkedIn
if you want to connect um and have any
further questions. I I'd be thrilled to
to answer any or or walk anybody through
um any of the parts that they were still
finding, you know, still found
confusing.
>> All right, perfect. Thank you. Thanks
again everybody for attending and and
Nathan, thanks a lot. We really
appreciate it and uh look forward to
talking with everybody again here soon.
>> My pleasure. Bye
>> bye.